# JavaScript loop methods and side-effects

In JavaScript you can loop over items in a lot of different ways.

Coming from Java my first intuition was to do either of these loops
```javascript
const fruits = ['apple', 'banana', 'cherry'];

for (const fruit of fruits) {
  console.log(fruit);
}

for (let i = fruits.length - 1; i >= 0; i--) {
  console.log(fruits[i]);
}
```

In JavaScript a manual counting for loop should generally only be used for fingercounting.

JavaScript luckily has built-in functional loop methods.

Using these instead of making your own loops will guarantee some code standardization + the loops are already optimized as best as possible.

## Functional loop methods
 
 - .forEach()
    
Loops over all elements and runs a function pr. element. It returns nothing
```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
numbers.forEach(n => console.log(n));
```

- .map()

Transforms each element and returns them to a new array
```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
const doubled = numbers.map(n => n * 2); // [2, 4, 6]
```

- .filter()

returns a new array of all elements that pass
```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
const big = numbers.filter(n => n > 1); // [2, 3]
```

- .reduce()

accumulates all elements into a single value
```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
const sum = numbers.reduce((acc, n) => acc + n, 0); // 6
```

- .find()

returns the first element that passes the test
```javascript
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
const found = numbers.find(n => n > 1); // 2
```

## Side effects

Not utilizing these loop methods in the correct way can result in side-effects. 
Side-effects are some of the most common bugs that can lead to unexpected behaviour in your code, and they are also some of the hardest to debug.

Side effects happen when we modify external variables inside a loop.
```javascript
let sum = 0;
numbers.forEach(n => sum += n); // side effect
```

in the example above we could have instead use the reduce method and assigned it to a new variable to get the same result but with no side-effects
```javascript
let sum = 0;
const arraySum = numbers.reduce((acc, n) => acc + n, 0); // 6
```

In the example under, we mutate the original list of users instead of using map() to create a new list of modified users
```javascript
const users = [{ name: "Gustavo", age: 20 }];

users.forEach(user => user.age++); // mutates the object itself
```

Correct way
```javascript
const users = [{ name: "Gustavo", age: 20 }];

const updatedUsers = users.map(user => ({ ...user, age: user.age + 1 }));
```
in the example above we used the spread operator which transfers all existing properties, and then we overwrite the age.