# Express.js

Express.js is a light-weight web framework for Node.js, installed via npm. It makes it much easier to create and manage HTTP servers compared to creating our own.

It handles routing and request/response logic out of the box, and is probably the most popular web framework for Node.js.

## How to set Express.js up

First you have to install express using npm:

```bash
npm install express
```

This will add it to your package.json and install it to your node_modules folder.

To actually use express.js in our code we need to import it into the script we want to use it in.

```javascript
import express from 'express';
```

This will import the whole express library, but now we have to create an instance of it to actually use it.

```javascript
const app = express();
```

Now we have an instance of express, but if we start our program nothing will happen.

That's because we need to tell express to listen on a port for it to start the web server.

```javascript
const PORT = process.env.PORT || 8080;

const server = app.listen(PORT, () => {
    console.log('Server running on port ' + server.address().port);
});
```

Now we can start our server.

## Creating endpoints

To create an endpoint we use the instantiated express like this:

```javascript
//Serve frontpage
app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.sendFile(path.resolve('public/pages/frontpage/frontpage.html'));
});
```

This example is a get endpoint that returns the html for my frontpage on this site.

The endpoint can be made with whatever HTTP verb.

```javascript
//Serve notes json
app.get('/api/notes', (req, res) => {
    res.send({ data: getAllNotes() });
});
```

This endpoint is also a get endpoint, however instead of returning an html site it returns JSON, which I can then parse in my frontend.

### Request params and body

If the client sends params or perhaps a body with the request, it can be accessed in the following way:

```javascript
app.get('/api/notes/:note', (req, res) => {
    const noteParam = req.params.note;

    const noteBody = req.body;
});
```

We can then do checks on these and respond accordingly.

### HTTP status codes

It's possible to define which status code your response should have:

```javascript
app.get('/api/notes/:note', (req, res) => {
    const note = getNote(req.params.note);

    if (!note) {
        return res.status(400).send({
            errorMessage: 'Note with name ' + req.params.note + ' could not be found',
        });
    }

    res.send({ data: note });
});
```

In this example the client is asking for a note that does not exist, hence why we set the status to 400.

## Serving static files

To serve static files in express.js you need to define your static/public folder:

```javascript
app.use(express.static('public'));
```

My project has a folder called public in its root.

Everything in this folder will be accessible to people using your server, so it should only contain assets that should actually be public.

From now on you should reference your files based on the public folder as the root.

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="assets/css/main.css" />
```

Above is my link tag for my stylesheet from my frontpage.
