# SSR vs CSR

Whether you render your HTML on your server or if it happens in the client's browser makes a difference in a couple of ways.

## Differences

- SSR requires less of the client's computer as content is sent directly and doesn't need to be rendered.
- SSR historically gives better SEO as content on the site is as it is. That makes it so Google's indexing robots can actually scan the content as they are not allowed to run scripts.
- SSR will put more load on the server. If your site is widely used your server should be able to handle that load.

## Difference in practice

### Client-side rendering

When I started this project I used client-side rendering.

I had scripts which were publicly served and ran as soon as the client had received the "bare bones" HTML.

These scripts would make an HTTP GET request to my backend to gather the necessary information and then render in the content.

### Server-side rendering

Now the project is using server-side rendering.

When a client calls an endpoint the backend does all of the rendering and only returns the HTML once all of the content is built.

## How?

To accomplish server-side rendering, I've built my own basic template engine that is pretty project specific.

It looks like this:

```javascript
'use strict';
import fs from 'fs';
import { createAllSideBarNoteOptions } from './sideBarUtil.js';
import { getAllNoteNames } from './notesUtil.js';

export function constructPage(page, note) {
    const header = readPage('./public/components/header/header.html');
    const sidebar = readPage('./public/components/sidebar/sidebar.html').replace(
        '{{notes}}',
        createAllSideBarNoteOptions(getAllNoteNames()),
    );

    return page
        .replaceAll('{{header}}', header)
        .replaceAll('{{sidebar}}', sidebar)
        .replaceAll('{{noteContent}}', note || 'Note not written yet');
}

export function readPage(path) {
    return fs.readFileSync(path, 'UTF-8').toString();
}
```

It parses the components and replaces tags that I've defined with something else. (The content that needs rendering)
