# Time and Date Objects in JavaScript

JavaScript has a built in date object that you can use.

## Different timezones

Depending on how you use your date object it will be in different timezones.

```javascript
console.log(new Date()); // UTC date + time

console.log(Date()); // Local time

console.log(Date.now()); // UNIX EPOCH time standard since January first (milliseconds since Jan. 1st 1970)
```

## Useful Date built-in methods

When you have created a Date object there are many built-in methods.

```javascript
const date = new Date();
date.getMonth();
date.getDay();
```

Both of the above methods do what you would think, just probably not in the way you would hope for. They both return a zero-indexed number resembling a month or a day of the week.

That's why there is a little more to getting the month or day than just using the methods above.

## Getting the Current Month in a readable format

**v1 - using `toLocaleString()`**

```javascript
const todaysDate = new Date();
todaysDate.toLocaleString('default', { month: 'short' }); // e.g. "Mar"
todaysDate.toLocaleString('da-dk', { month: 'long' }); // e.g. "Marts"
```

The method above can take various options depending on how you want your date formatted. The first parameter decides which language the response should be in. Using default will output it in American English.

The second parameter is the options object. Here we can define in key-value pairs month, weekday and how they each should be returned in string format.

**v2 - using a manual array**

```javascript
const months = [
    'January',
    'February',
    'March',
    'April',
    'May',
    'June',
    'July',
    'August',
    'September',
    'October',
    'November',
    'December',
];

const month = months[new Date().getMonth()]; // e.g. "March"
```

It's also possible to create your own array of months and then use the index of the `getMonth()` method to get the correct month.

## Getting the Current Day

**v1 - using a manual array**

```javascript
const weekdays = ['Sunday', 'Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday', 'Friday', 'Saturday'];

const day = weekdays[new Date().getDay()]; // e.g. "Monday"
```

Here you can also create your own array of days, just remember that index 0 resembles Sunday and not Monday. That's a little weird when you're from Denmark since our weeks start on Mondays and not Sundays.

**v2 - using `toLocaleString()`**

```javascript
const day = new Date().toLocaleString('da-dk', { weekday: 'long' }); // e.g. "mandag"
```

You can also use the same built-in method mentioned earlier to get the weekday.
