# JavaScript datatypes

I will go over each of the data types that we have used this semester

## Number

Number datatype consists of all whole numbers, not whole numbers and also NaN

Here are some declared number variables

```javascript
const age = 25;
const price = 9.99;
const notNum = NaN;
```

## String

String datatype is a sequence of characters. 

They can be written in a couple of diffrent ways as shown under

```javascript
const greeting = `Hello!`;
const name = "Gustavo";
const lastName = 'rock';
```

## Boolean

Boolean datatype is either true or false

```javascript
const isActive = true;
const isLoggedIn = false;
```

## Undefined

A variable is undefined when its declared but not assigned 

In the example under here the console will log "undefined"

```javascript
let x;
console.log(x);
```

## Null

You can assign a variable the value null to make it explicitly not have a value

```javascript
const user = null;
```

## Object

An object in JavaScript is a collection of key-value pairs. Values inside objects can be all datatypes.

This is an example of how an object can be written

```javascript
const person = { name: "Gustav Torup Jacobsen", age: 22 };
```

In the example above name and age are the keys and "Gustav Torup Jacobsen" and 22 are the values

## Array - Object

An array in JavaScript is a zero-indexed collection of data. 
Data can be accessed by its index. Arrays can consist of all types of datatypes.
Even though an array is all of the above mentioned its datatype is an object.

This is an example of an array with numbers

```javascript
const nums = [1, 2, 3];
```


Other built-in objects include: Date, Map, Set, Promise

## Function

A function is its own datatype in JavaScript. It is a reusable block of instructions that executes when called. 
Because functions are a form of datatype they can also be passed as arguments in other functions, but we'll talk more about that in chapter 8.

This is an example of a simple function

```javascript
function greet() { return "hi"; }
```